Add draft DEP dissolving Django core. (#47)
django/deps: draft/XXXX-dissolve-core.rst

   channel.

In its place, the following model will be adopted for management of
Django's code:

The Django framework's codebase shall be governed by a new Framework
team. The Framework team will be made up of general members, as well
as two specialized roles.

The full details follow below, but a short description is:

* Anyone who joins the django-developers mailing list is a member of
  the Framework team, and can take part in discussion, decision-making
  and elections.

* A new role, Merger, exists and will consist of being responsible for
  merging pull requests.

* Decision-making will occur on the django-developers mailing list,
  with participation open to anyone. Decisions will be made by voting,
  with Mergers keeping track of votes to determine if a consensus
  exists toward a particular decision.

* A technical board, elected by the Framework team, will exist as a
  tie-breaker and to provide oversight of the Mergers.

New role: Merger
----------------

In place of the committer, Django will formalize and expand the *de
facto* process already in place: the role of the Merger. A Merger is a
person who merges pull requests to https://github.com/django/django/.

> The set of Mergers should be small; the ideal would be between three

Reviewer: Regarding github permissions, this is something Mariatta has considered for the PEP she is writing to move issues to github: https://mariatta.ca/core-sprint-2018-part-2.html

> So what we can do is to invite the current bug triagers as collaborators for CPython repository, give them that write access, and add branch protection such that only Python core developers can push / commit into the active branches.

Protect the release branches to a Mergers group.

> The set of Mergers should be small; the ideal would be between three

Author: What @aaugustin said -- the worry is if there's a large Merger team, it's just "Django core" with a different name. The key thing here is turning merging code into a role rather than a glamorous privilege, and moving decision-making to a much more open process.

> The set of Mergers should be small; the ideal would be between three

Reviewer 2: How is "being a merger" and thus one of a "small set" less of a "glamorous privilege" than being part of core, which is significantly bigger than the "small set"?

and five people, in order to spread the workload and avoid
over-burdening or burning out any individual Merger. in light of that,
the current Django Fellows will become the first set of Mergers, and
recruitment should begin imediately thereafter to bring the number of
Mergers up to at least three. It shall not be a requirement that a
Merger also be a Django Fellow, but the Django Software Foundation
shall have the power to use funding of Fellow positions as a way to
make the role of Merger sustainable.

> Mergers shall also have the authority to make releases of Django,

Reviewer 3: On the assumption there are at least two Fellows I would (still) have the Fellows do the releases, for the reasons Tim cites, and that it's a bit fiddly.

including uploading packages to the Python Package Index and to the
djangoproject.com servers, according to release schedules determined
by the consensus of the Framework team.

Repurposed role: Technical board
--------------------------------

The Framework team shall elect a technical board. The mechanics and
timing of elections are discussed further below.

The technical board will provide oversight and a tie-breaking vote
when normal decision-making processes fail.

The technical board will consist of five members, elected from among
the membership of the Framework team. To be qualified for election to
the technical board, a member of the Framework team must demonstrate:

* A history of technical contributions to Django. This should involve
  some minimum number of merged contributions; at least five, and
  probably ten, with the first merged contribution occurring at least

>   18 months prior to election to the technical board.

Author: I want people to have commits in Django at some point in the past. I don't care as much if they're still generating commits today, if they're also contributing to the progress of the framework in other ways. Someone with a contribution history who hops into technical discussions on the django-developers list, for example, should be eligible even if they haven't personally contributed any code in a while.

a pull request begin such a discussion, or a Merger may make the
initial post to django-developers, and from that point the pull
request shall not be merged until at least one week has elapsed, from
the date of the first post in the django-developers thread, for
discussion of it.

The only other methods for adding code to Django are:

* Patches generated by the Django security team for the purpose of
  resolving security issues in Django. Once such a patch is signed off
  by the security team, it can and shall be merged by a Merger on the
  designated disclosure date.

* When a release of Django is ready, Mergers may also make such
  commits as are necessary to carry out the mechanics of releasing
  Django (such as changing version numbers in configuration files,
  creating or updating release branches, and so on).

The Framework team
------------------

The process of adding code to Django will be governed by a Framework
team. Membership in this team is open to anyone who wants it, and the
business of the Framework team will be carried out in public on the
django-developers mailing list. Membership in the Framework team shall

> be conferred automatically upon joining that mailing list.

Reviewer: I don't think using the DSF membership list is the right choice here. It excludes a lot of people that actively participate in the development of Django. Many members within the DSF do not participate in the development of Django (the code base), as evident by many of the members comments.

If the goal is to minimise vote manipulation, then I think we should find another way to do so, or to insert protections where it's obvious that there is vote manipulation occurring.

Here are some ideas:

- Votes only count from members that have a minimum number of comments (participation threshold)
- Votes that have clearly been manipulated are pushed to the technical board for a decision
- Can we use the moderation tools of the list to block accounts that have been used for vote manipulation, and moderate away the vote?

> be conferred automatically upon joining that mailing list.

Reviewer 4: Or maybe it could be limited to people who have commits in Django?

> be conferred automatically upon joining that mailing list.

Reviewer 5: I think it's a barrier that might exclude participation we otherwise want to encourage. I'd prefer to see an alternate approach to minimising vote manipulation, if we even think it's worth tackling now.

> be conferred automatically upon joining that mailing list.

Reviewer 5: I just noticed you mentioned vouching by a DSF member in your original post - I think that's a good compromise actually.

> be conferred automatically upon joining that mailing list.

Author: We could use the DSF membership, but we'd have to completely rearchitect DSF membership to do that. Using the set of people who've expressed interest by joining the dev list, with the DSF Board as a check on people trying to sign up tons of troll accounts to vote, seemed the simpler option there.

The Framework team shall operate on a consensus model. Whenever any
member of the Framework team wishes to get feedback on code, design
decisions or other technical proposals, they will post a summary to
the django-developers list for discussion. Any member of the Framework
team may respond and state their opinions or arguments for or against
the proposal, and their vote if they wish to make one. Votes shall be
of the form "+1" (in favor) or "-1" (not in favor). There shall be no

> explicit "abstain", "0", "+0" or "-0" votes. Any member wishing to

Author: Mostly: if we're going to vastly increase the number of people who have a vote, we need to figure out how to manage it. Setting up the process so people only vote when they actually have a strong opinion (as opposed to a bunch of +0/-0/explicit abstain votes from people who don't have strong opinions) seemed like a way to do that.

> explicit "abstain", "0", "+0" or "-0" votes. Any member wishing to

Reviewer 6: Thanks for clarifying.

> explicit "abstain", "0", "+0" or "-0" votes. Any member wishing to

Reviewer 7: The "+0 / -0" votes always confused me when I started reading django-developers. I think it's a good idea to get rid of them.

> explicit "abstain", "0", "+0" or "-0" votes. Any member wishing to

Reviewer 8: +0/-0 only makes sense if there are votes that can only pass with a certain percentage of eligible voters having voted. As the voting happens on the mailing list and if you signed up you will probably read it within a week and thus be able to vote on it.

If a Merger want certain people to have a look at a proposal and vote on it there is still the option to contact them directly to ask them for their input/vote.

a decision of the technical board. The technical board shall then
review the discussion up to that point, and each technical board
member shall cast a vote of either "+1" (in favor) or "-1" (not in
favor). Members of the technical board will cast their votes publicly
on the django-developers mailing list, and should provide explanations
of their votes when doing so. Members of the technical board should
cast their votes within one week of the request for a decision.

Once sufficient votes on either side have been cast to form a majority
of the technical board, a call will be made for the remaining members
to cast their votes. They shall have one week from that point to cast
their votes, or the discussion and vote will close automatically, with
the decision made in favor of the side carrying the majority of the
technical board's votes.

Process of selecting Mergers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As noted above, the initial set of Mergers will be the current Django
Fellows. The Framework team shall then work to select at least one
additional Merger, and shall at all times attempt to maintain a roster
of at least three Mergers. The Framework team shall keep in mind the

> need for sufficient time-zone coverage to ensure availability of at

Reviewer 7: Agree, there has never been a rush to merge stuff at any of the sprints I've been at and I don't think anything has suffered as a result

> need for sufficient time-zone coverage to ensure availability of at

Reviewer: What has been useful at sprints are members that have a history of contributing to the code base that can help new devs setup environments and teach how to triage issues. I don't think this should fall to the merger role, but it's something we should consider in the future for sprints. Perhaps the DSF can put a call out for "helpers" for the major sprints that can take on this role?

> need for sufficient time-zone coverage to ensure availability of at

Reviewer 3: I think the reference to sprints here is a separate topic. I'm all behind improving attendance and participation as best we can but it's not about the Merger role.

least one Merger during sprints at major events such as
DjangoCons. Mergers are not required to attend DjangoCons, but are
encouraged to do so and to be present for development sprints; the
Django Software Foundation shall have the power to grant funding for
the purpose of making Mergers' attendance at DjangoCons easier.

Upon adoption of this proposal, the initial set of Mergers, and the
technical board, shall work together to design a process for selecting
future Mergers, and prior to adoption of that process, shall post it

> to the django-developers mailing list for feedback and voting. The

Reviewer 9: I agree with the goal of what you're saying, but I don't necessarily think term limits may be necessary. Does this mean we'd only allow someone to hold the position of Django Fellow for a fixed amount of time, for example? I'd prefer some form of quantifiable activity required to maintain the merger role other than passage of time, as keeping people who are actively involved in merging (and the institutional knowledge that goes with such activity!) seems valuable.

> to the django-developers mailing list for feedback and voting. The

Author: I'm not sure I understand the question; there are no term limits for Mergers here.

> to the django-developers mailing list for feedback and voting. The

Reviewer: Correct - there are not. But I was specifically looking for a process that would avoid the current situation that we're in where mergers are never retired. Here's a brief example of what I would like to see:

- The set of mergers are automatically retired after some period X (maybe in line with the technical board, where a merger role is granted for a major series release)

- A merger CAN become a merger in the next term period

- The number of mergers can not exceed some limit X (say, 5)

Alternatively, we could review the set of mergers after each point release. "Who is interested/not interested in serving again? If we need more numbers, who from the framework team that meets the technical requirements would be interested in serving?"

In that way, the merger team would not be unlike that of the technical board. How the elections/appointments happen I'm less concerned with, and I think that could be handled by the incoming framework team. But I think some limits should be set sooner rather than later.

> to the django-developers mailing list for feedback and voting. The

Reviewer 4: I'm interested in something like that too: You're automatically out of a certain period of time. I think that would help prevent burnout, and it would help encourage more people to "try it out" for a period of time. That way you're not just "in for life". (Fellows are an exception - they're in as long as DSF is paying them)

> to the django-developers mailing list for feedback and voting. The

Author: @jarshwah if you'd like to write up an alternative proposal, go for it -- I did this basically because "let's fix the project organization" has come up so many times on mailing lists but nobody had ever taken the step of proposing how to do it.

> to the django-developers mailing list for feedback and voting. The

Reviewer: I'm glad you have too. I have no interest in putting together an alternative proposal, especially if it were to only differ by some small details. I'd be happy to send a PR to amend some detail if you were interested though.

> to the django-developers mailing list for feedback and voting. The

Reviewer 4: Ok, I've put together at least a rough outline for a proposal here: https://github.com/django/deps/issues/50

consensus model described above will be used to determine whether to
adopt the process, but in the event of no clear consensus the result
shall be that the process is not adopted, and a new process shall be
drafted taking into account the feedback obtained from discussion.

Whatever process is adopted, no person shall simultaneously serve as a
Merger and as a member of the technical board.

Mergers may resign their role at any time, but are encouraged to
provide some advance notice in order to allow the selection of a
replacement. Termination of the contract of a Django Fellow by the
Django Software Foundation will temporarily suspend a Merger's role
until such time as the technical board can convene to determine a
course of action; they may, by majority vote, choose to retain the
Merger in that role, or to remove the Merger.

> Otherwise, a Merger may only be removed by:

Reviewer 10: I would think there should be some activity guideline for mergers (i.e. merging an average of x pull requests per month or something). Not necessarily a requirement since life happens, but an expectation of stewarding the privilege, especially if the group is intentionally kept very small.

My alternate proposal would be to let the mergers team manage itself. Contributors to Django apply to become a merge if they think they'll use that privilege and self-renew yearly if they're still active. Existing mergers are in the best position to evaluate new members since they're reviewing pull requests from all contributors and will have a good sense if an applicant follows Django's contributing guidelines without much guidance.

Reviewer: > and self-renew yearly if they're still active

This is the kind of thing I was wanting to see. It'll allow inactive members to cycle out.

Reviewer 11: I suggest that the rules for removing Mergers should be set together with the rules for appointing them.

* Decision-making will occur on the django-developers mailing list,
  with participation open to anyone. Decisions will be made by voting,
  with Mergers keeping track of votes to determine if a consensus
  exists toward a particular decision.

* A Technical Board, elected by the Framework team, will exist as a
  tie-breaker and to provide oversight of the Mergers.

New role: Merger
----------------

In place of the committer, Django will formalize and expand the *de
facto* process already in place: the role of the Merger. A Merger is a
person who merges pull requests to https://github.com/django/django/.

The set of Mergers should be small; the ideal would be between three
and five people, in order to spread the workload and avoid
over-burdening or burning out any individual Merger. In light of that,
the current Django Fellows will become the first set of Mergers, and
recruitment shall begin imediately thereafter to bring the number of
Mergers up to at least three. It shall not be a requirement that a
Merger also be a Django Fellow, but the Django Software Foundation
shall have the power to use funding of Fellow positions as a way to
make the role of Merger sustainable.

> New role: Releaser

Reviewer 3: Hey @ubernostrum. I really like the new update. 

I wonder if here is quite the scope to go into the details of the release process, rather than just linking to the other doc? 

Thought: It doesn't quite seem to match up to how we actually do it. (Feature releases being time based, largely because of the supported versions policy, and so on.) Best to have one canonical doc.

------------------

Over its history, the Django project has granted various people
permission to issue packaged releases of Django. At present five
people have permission to upload releases to the Python Package Index.

The role of Releaser will formalize this permission: a Releaser is a
person who has the authority (and will be granted the necessary
permissions) to upload packaged releases of Django to the Python
Package Index, and to djangoproject.com.

A person may serve in the role of Releaser and Merger simultaneously.

> A person who has the role of Releaser will *not* automatically be

Author: I went back and forth on this a bit, and I don't think it should be required that a Releaser is a Merger. There might be times when it requires coordination between a non-Releaser Merger and a non-Merger Releaser, but I want the flexibility to decouple the roles from each other for future-proofing purposes -- the fewer people we have to set up with permissions to push packages (especially as Django Fellows can rotate out), the better.

release process, take part in filling certain roles, and have a
tie-breaking vote when normal decision-making processes fail.

The Technical Board will consist of five members, elected from among
the membership of the Framework team. To be qualified for election to
the Technical Board, a member of the Framework team must demonstrate:

* A history of technical contributions to Django. This should involve
  some minimum number of merged contributions; at least five, and
  probably ten, with the first merged contribution occurring at least
  18 months prior to election to the Technical Board.

* A history of participation in Django's development outside of
  contributions merged to the <https://github.com/django/django/>
  repository. This may include, but is not restricted to:
  participation in discussions on the django-developers mailing list;
  reviewing and offering feedback on pull requests in the Django
  source repository; and assisting in triage and management of the
  Django bug tracker.

How code is added to Django
---------------------------

Any Merger may, on their own initiative, merge any pull request other

> than one authored by that Marger. Mergers will be trusted to use their

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
than one authored by that Merger. Mergers will be trusted to use their
```

the proposal, and their vote if they wish to make one. Votes shall be
of the form "+1" (in favor) or "-1" (not in favor). There shall be no
explicit "abstain", "0", "+0" or "-0" votes. Any member wishing to
participate in a discussion without casting a vote may simply do so,
with no need to announce an abstention.

Mergers may request that a discussion close and any interested members
cast their votes; after making such a request, Mergers should wait at
least one week before treating the discussion and voting as closed.

Mergers shall use the results of votes cast in the discussion as a
guide to their actions; their judgment will be trusted in determining
whether a consensus has formed for or against.

Role of the Technical Board in decision-making
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Technical Board will provide oversight of the release
process. While some releases (monthly patch releases, and alpha/beta
versions of feature releases) will occur on pre-determined schedules,
the following release decisions will be made by the Technical Board:

* Release candidates for feature releases.

* Feature releases.

> For these, the Mergers and Releasers shall have the prerogative to ask

Author: The main reason behind this is the trend of ensuring no one person gets to make large decisions (even if they seem fairly obvious) about Django. Having feature releases be approved by the technical board isn't a huge burden, I think, and accomplishes the goal.

> For these, the Mergers and Releasers shall have the prerogative to ask

Reviewer 10: I don't see release candidate and final releases as large decisions. Perhaps if you list the steps for "determination of release readiness" you can convince me that this is something that the technical board adds value by doing.

In my mind, the release that involves the most discretion is the feature freeze (alpha release). Since 1.8, I've always been able to get a consensus about how to proceed on the "status of X.Y release blockers" threads. There might be some value in detailing the responsibilities of a release manager unless you wish to eliminate that role. I think that role has also worked well for Python.

> For these, the Mergers and Releasers shall have the prerogative to ask

Reviewer 3: As I read this the `...prerogative to ask...` is key. 

If no-one asks then Tim's story will be the one in play. 99 times in a 100 that'll happen. But maybe one-time there is a need to ask, then we have a documented policy. 

Is that a fair reading?

I'm not sure there's a real disagreement here. If nobody asks then releases can go by with consensus, as now, as Tim describes. But if a Merger or Releaser did see reason for oversight or arbitration or...

> For these, the Mergers and Releasers shall have the prerogative to ask

Reviewer 11: This seems odd, and very different from existing processes AFAIK. The last time I followed the release process closely, the release was made on a pre-determined date, provided that no blocker bugs existed. This is an objective measure and a proven process. Why change it?
As a side, "lawyerly" argument, and as noted by @timgraham , it seems that this section aims to change the role of Release Manager -- which, by definitions at the preamble, would be out of scope.

> For these, the Mergers and Releasers shall have the prerogative to ask

Author: There seemed to be a desire (from the first round of feedback) to define a "Releaser" role. I'm not super committed to doing it in this document, which is why the Releaser bits are pretty rough.

The part about asking the technical board to approve a release is mostly there to assuage fears that the more open general decision-making process could push out a really bad release, by allowing the technical board to put the brakes on and prevent it going out the door. Open to better ideas on how to do this.

  committee of the Django Software Foundation, or

* By a unanimous vote of the Technical Board.

Process of selecting Releasers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As noted above, the initial set of Releasers will be the current
Django Fellows, plus one additional person, chosen by the Technical
Board, from among those people who currently have permission to issue
releases of Django.

Releasers may resign their role at any time, but are encouraged to
provide some advance notice in order to allow the selection of a
replacement. When a vacancy occurs among the Releasers, it shall be
filled by a decision of the Technical Board, using the voting process
outlined above.

Termination of the contract of a Django Fellow by the Django Software
Foundation will temporarily suspend a Releaser's role until such time
as the Technical Board can convene to determine a course of action;
they may, by majority vote, choose to retain the Releaser in that
role, or to remove the Releaser.

Otherwise, a Releaser may only be removed by:

* Becoming disqualified due to actions taken by the Code of Conduct
  committee of the Django Software Foundation, or

> * By a unanimous vote of the Technical Board.

Reviewer 11: But if I read things correctly, a Releaser may serve on the Technical Board.

Author: Yeah, I still don't know exactly what I want to do with the Releaser qualifications.

In my head, I saw it as not necessarily having full commit privileges, so less of a potential conflict in having a Releaser on the technical board, but as I said in another comment the whole Releaser role is still pretty rough right now.

   candidate; the candidate registration form and roster of candidates
   will be overseen by the DSF Board, and candidates will be required
   to provide evidence of their qualifications as part of
   registration. The DSF Board may challenge and reject the
   registration of candidates it believes do not meet the
   qualifications of members of the Technical Board.

4. Registration of candidates will close two weeks after it has
   opened. One week after registration of candidates closes, the
   roster of candidates will be posted to the django-developers
   mailing list, and the election will begin. The DSF Board will
   provide a voting form accessible to registered voters, and shall be
   the custodian of the votes.

5. The election will end one week after it begins. The DSF Board shall
   tally the votes and produce a summary, including the total number
   of votes cast and the number received by each candidate. This
   summary shall be ratified by a majority vote of the DSF Board, then
   posted to the django-developers mailing list. The five candidates
   with the highest vote totals will then become the new Framework
   team Technical Board.

> 

Reviewer 11: Every voter gets to vote for five candidates (as we do today)?

Django's release cycle currently consists of a major series with three
minor releases. For example, the 2.x major series will include the
minor releases 2.0, 2.1 and 2.2, after which the 3.x major series will
begin.

At least one election of the Technical Board must occur for each major
series. If the final minor release of a major series is issued, and no
election has yet taken place, an election shall automatically be

> triggered. The Technical Board may, at its discretion, choose to run

Reviewer 11: "Automatically triggered" here means "it's the DSF Board's responsibility to actually set things in motion", right? Perhaps it should be phrased more explicitly.

Reviewer 2: I don't think the DSF should trigger the vote. Why can't the technical board trigger it themselves?

elections more often, but not more often than once per minor release.

In the event a member of the Technical Board is temporarily unable to
serve, the Technical Board will continue to carry out its duties
unless it would be reduced to fewer than three active members; in that
case, the Technical Board may, by majority vote, appoint a person (who
is otherwise qualified for the Technical Board) to serve until such
time as at least three elected members are able to serve again, or the
next election is held.

Members of the Technical Board cannot be removed from the technical
board once elected, unless it is determined by a unanimous vote of the
other Technical Board members and the DSF Board that they did not
possess the appropriate qualifications for the Technical Board, or
they become disqualified due to actions taken by the Code of Conduct

> committee of the Django Software Foundation.

Reviewer 11: I think that if a member of the Technical Board has managed to convince all other TB members and DSF Board members that they (singular they, the first member) should be removed, we shouldn't limit the grounds for removal. I would require only unanimous agreement on the reason for removal.

Motivation
==========

The state of Django core is, at best, stagnant. New members are added
at a very slow rate, and most existing members rarely if ever make use
of their ability to push code to Django. Furthermore, the current
state of Django's codebase seems not to be amenable to ongoing
recruitment of new members to Django core; several people have
expressed the opinion (or variations on it) that most of the types of
issues traditionally used as an entry route to core are now resolved,
and it's unclear what the path to core membership would look like
without such issues as a route to familiarity with contributing to
Django.

There is also a serious, ongoing lack of diversity in Django core, and
no clear path to addressing it. The changes proposed here are not
sufficient to resolve this, but some type of change along these lines
is likely a necessary step toward other initiatives which could
resolve it.

The primary goal of this proposal is to remove the perceived status
associated with being able to push code to the primary Django
source-code repository, and to re-frame the ability to push code to
that repository as more of a bureaucratic role which carries with it

> no special privileges or status of any sort.

Reviewer 11: I disagree. The Mergers are not beaurocrats -- they are asked to apply skill, taste and judgment.

I would rephrase this more along the lines of "remove the prestige & status which had, in the past, been given somewhat arbitrarily, and replace them with roles which are more in line with work actually being done".

Author: There's a difficult line to walk here in trying to outline the role of the Merger, because the goal is literally to remove as much *individual* "skill, taste and judgment" as possible from the process. Otherwise we might as well just say "we're keeping everything the same, but the core team is now called the Mergers team and there are fewer of them".

In my ideal world, the Merger role would literally be "push the button when consensus is reached on django-developers to do so". I can't make that happen since requiring a formal discussion + vote on every single PR is unlikely to scale, but that's where I'm coming from.

Reviewer 11: There is a difference between "strategic" decisions, whose place is in the mailing list, and "tactical" discussions and decisions, usually made on PRs.

If the Merger's role is just to "push the button", then the process of PR review needs to be re-engineered -- the process today assumes that whoever pushes the button takes some responsibility for the commits, and is expected to give the PR a thorough review. In what you describe, that thorough review is nobody's job, and I suspect it's hard to keep a high-quality codebase this way.

Author: This is why I said I have an ideal in mind, but I also know I can't actually achieve that ideal. What I can do is try to get as close as possible to it, and doing everything I can to minimize the amount of perceived prestige/status associated with the Merger role. Which is what I'm trying to do with this proposal.

Reviewer 12: Is something like "core reviewers" more appropriate here?

Reviewer 11: @imanhodjaev The old core had already placed an emphasis on reviewing.

@ubernostrum It is possible that I don't understand your ideal, but what I understand seems to be "Mergers will be making skillful, tasteful judgment calls all day long, but we'll try our best not to give them credit for it". The proposal, as I read it, does nothing to distribute the weight of the final review task, and effectively leaves the process of accepting PRs as it is today; the people who perform it do deserve recognition, IMO.

I wholeheartedly support this proposal, its rationale and motivations as presented in the beginning of the DEP. I agree that core, as currently exists, is a problem that needs to be solved. But I don't agree that the very idea of technical leadership should be done away with. The Technical Board is not expected to be "technical leadership" -- it is not expected to initiate almost anything on its own, for example (and indeed hasn't done so, as far as I'm aware).

We're not keeping everything the same. The Mergers don't appoint the Technical Board anymore. I'm also assuming the Mergers don't elect new Mergers in a process that is opaque to the rest of the community. The Mergers' votes don't count more than other community members' votes in any decision on django-developers. The whole system is much more open and democratic. But a small group of people are still going to be given keys to control the day-to-day evolution of the project, and if we all agree that their job is not bureaucratic, I don't see what is to be gained by pretending that it is.

Reviewer 6: I don't quite agree that "old core" had an "emphasis on reviewing". Getting a core dev to review another contributor's patch was always a struggle.

We had to pay people to get that job done properly. Considering that it's the only task for which people get paid in the project, it can't be prestigious.

I understand that calling it "bureaucratic" may seem extreme. I would argue that extremism is a proven method for creating change ;-)

Reviewer 3: As I understood the intention here (from the discussion on the DSF list), the idea was to separate review from merging (or _having the commit-bit™_). 

Currently there are, say, ≈10 people who actively review. Of those, say, ≈4 actually make any merges or backports. Mergers would just be the 4. It'd fall apart if the other 6 stopped reviewing. We still need them. (And more!)

There's a few things which I think are out of scope for this proposal, all of which are important. 

* Recognition of current and past contributors.
    * How to get participation of such at sprints and mentoring etc. 
* Encouraging new contributors from across the community,
    * How to give recognition to new contributors. 

There may be others. Maybe it's worth an "Out of Scope Here" section to at least highlight them?

Author: The DSF Board is working on a separate initiative to provide recognition of people who've made major contributions to the advancement of Django, sort of like what the PSF Fellowship (we can't use that name, unfortunately) is for Python.

This proposal, meanwhile, is pretty much fundamentally opposed to Shai's position -- the goal is to do away with the idea that some select group has special powers to decide what goes into Django, and allow essentially anyone who acts in good faith to take part in that decision-making process. Mergers, for example, would not have the power to say "even though django-developers reached consensus in favor of this, I'm refusing to merge it in". And the technical board would not have a veto either; they'd only be able to make a decision in the event of deadlock in the open-to-anyone decision-making process.

Reviewer 13: I share @shaib and @claudep's feeling here. My contributions to the framework certainly helped me and other contributors get a better position because of the technical knowledge we built over time by taking part in discussions and reviewing PRs and I understand not everyone would have been able to contribute that much in the first place.

However I and many other contributors not on the "technical board", most of which are part of the "core team", still dedicate a non negligible amount of their free time to PR reviews and ticket triaging even if under the proposal that should be "fellow work". There's currently no recognition for this kind of work outside of the "core developer" status so the dissolution of the team would certainly lead to a wipe out of recognized past years contributions to the project even if a PSF-Fellowship-like emeritus role was to be created given we are still actively contributing to the project.

> Mergers, for example, would not have the power to say "even though django-developers reached consensus in favor of this, I'm refusing to merge it in".

Out of curiosity, has this ever happened in the past with the current structure? Is this really a problem? I've certainly seen requests to reach out to django-developers to resolve divergence of opinions or PRs and tickets but I don't recall a refusal to merge once consensus is reached.

Reviewer 14: This is a good perspective to keep in mind; thanks for sharing it @charettes @shaib @claudep.

I feel pretty comfortable speaking for @ubernostrum in saying that the intent here isn't to remove recognition from people doing good work! The problem (as I see it) is that we're currently *also* recognizing people for (long-)past contributions, giving them power and status that may not be appropriate any more. I'm the perfect example of this: I'm a member of Django Core, giving me status and access, but I haven't contributed to the core code in *years*. Frankly, I'm not sure I even *could* any more (not without some coaching to get back up to speed).

I think the point here is that we're trying to align who has power and status within the developer community with who's actually doing the work. I shouldn't get to wear that the Core badge indefinitely, right?

Now, recognition for past contributions *is* something that should exist, too -- and like James says I know some things are in play at the DSF level to work on that. But I think that's out of scope for this proposal. As I see it, this change is a great step in the right direction. It's not the last step, but the existence of future steps shouldn't prevent us from taking this one.

Reviewer 11: @jacobian in response to:
> I feel pretty comfortable speaking for @ubernostrum in saying that the intent here isn't to remove recognition from people doing good work! The problem (as I see it) is that we're currently also recognizing people for (long-)past contributions, giving them power and status that may not be appropriate any more.

My first comment on this thread said:
> I would rephrase this more along the lines of "remove the prestige & status which had, in the past, been given somewhat arbitrarily, and replace them with roles which are more in line with work actually being done".

These two seem perfectly aligned. @ubernostrum and @aaugustin present a different approach -- IIUC, that official roles in the project should not carry with them any direct recognition (only recognition via number of commits etc). I find this approach counter-productive.

The practical implications of this difference in this document are close to nil -- but I suspect further implications will pop up as we start to discuss the procedure for elections of Mergers and as we start working, day-to-day, with the new structure. So I think we should come to an agreement, one way or another.

======================
DEP XXXX: DEP template
======================

:DEP: XXXX
:Author: James Bennett
:Implementation Team: James Bennett, others to be determined
:Shepherd: Aymeric Augustin
:Status: Draft
:Type: Process
:Created: 2018-09-22
:Last-Modified: 2019-02-19

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 3
   :local:

Abstract
========

This is a proposal to reform the organization of the Django
open-source project, by dissolving the current team of committers and

> replacing it with a new governance model.

Reviewer 15: Something that I think needs to be included somewhere (unless it is already and I didn't see it): How will changes to this governance model be ratified in the future? I.e., with what shall we replace this statement at the end of https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/internals/organization/ currently?

> Changes to this document require a four fifths majority of votes cast in a core team vote and no veto by the technical board.

groups:

* "Django core": the set of people who have or have had permission to
  push to <https://github.com/django/django/> or the previous
  Subversion repository, or who have been members of the django-core
  mailing list, the #django-core IRC channel, or identified as members
  of "Django core" on the djangoproject.com website.

* "DSF Board": the Board of Directors of the Django Software
  Foundation.

* "Django Fellows": a list of multiple people who have been, and in
  two cases still are, paid by the Django Software Foundation to
  perform various tasks, including triaging issues, reviewing and
  merging pull requests, and managing Django's releases.

This proposal deals only with replacing "Django core" as defined
above. No other team or group within the Django community is
considered here, nor will any other team or group be considered; the
scope of this proposal is solely "Django core".

Specification
=============

Django core will be dissolved. This would involve:

1. Removing push access to <https://github.com/django/django/> from
   nearly all people who currently have it.

2. Closing the django-core mailing list and the #django-core IRC

>    channel.

Reviewer 16: Should we close also `django-core-mentorship`? because theoretically it is strictly related with the Core Team:
> "Core team members are always looking for promising contributors, teaching them how the project is managed, and submitting their names to the core team’s vote when they’re ready. If you would like to join the core team, you can contact a core team member privately or ask for guidance on the Django Core Mentorship mailing-list."

Reviewer 17: Yeah I think that makes sense.  No one to mentor toward something that no longer exists!

Reviewer 11: I've seen people being guided towards that channel not just for the purpose of getting into the core team, but also as a place for guidance on contributing to Django. While some of that is obviously done on other channels (like `#django-dev`), a channel dedicated to helping people to start contributing may still be valuable. I would consider just renaming it to `#django-dev-mentorship` and adapting the description accordingly, rather than closing it (but I haven't been there myself a lot, people who have should probably comment)

Reviewer 6: In my experience django-core-mentorship is very low traffic and not a big success. I'd lean towards closing it and trying another medium — probably something closer to chat than to email.

Reviewer 3: Yep +1. I've been telling folks about django-core-mentorship for a year now, actively saying "Use it!" with no uptick. We need something but a mailing list isn't it (it seems).

Reviewer 7: I think it's better to keep a mailing list even if it's low volume. I for one enjoy answering questions on it, there have been a few from motivated contributors. Renaming seems fine to me.

3. Ceasing to recognize any special status within the Django
   open-source project for people who formerly had push access or were
   members of the django-core mailing list or #django-core IRC
   channel.

In its place, the following model will be adopted for management of
Django's code:

The Django framework's codebase shall be governed by a new Framework
team. The Framework team will be made up of general members, as well
as three specialized roles.

The full details follow below, but a short description is:

* Membership in the Framework team is generally open to the public
  (with the primary exception of individuals ineligible due to actions

>   of the Code of Conduct committee of the Dajgno Software Foundation,

Reviewer 18: Typo: Dajgno

  reviewing and offering feedback on pull requests in the Django
  source repository; and assisting in triage and management of the
  Django bug tracker.

How code is added to Django
---------------------------

Any Merger may, on their own initiative, merge any pull request other
than one authored by that Merger. Mergers will be trusted to use their
judgment in deciding whether to merge any given pull request.

Mergers should, however, wait to merge any pull request which adds a
significant new feature or API, or makes significant changes to an
existing feature or API, until discussion has occurred on the
django-developers mailing list. Any Merger may ask that the author of
a pull request begin such a discussion, or a Merger may make the
initial post to django-developers, and from that point the pull
request shall not be merged until at least one week has elapsed, from
the date of the first post in the django-developers thread, for
discussion of it.

The only other methods for adding code to Django are:

* Patches generated by the Django security team for the purpose of
  resolving security issues in Django. Once such a patch is signed off

>   by the security team, it can and shall be merged by a Merger on the

Reviewer 2: How about "must" instead?
```suggestion
  by the security team, it must be merged by a Merger on the
```

guide to their actions; their judgment will be trusted in determining
whether a consensus has formed for or against.

A member of the Framework team can be removed in either of two ways:

* By becoming ineligible due to action of the Code of Conduct
  committee of the Django Software Foundation, or

* By unanimous vote of the Technical Board.

A person removed from the Framework team may be removed from the
django-developers mailing list, and have their permissions to interact
in other technical spaces (such as the bug tracker, or GitHub)
revoked.

No vote of the Technical Board shall be required to remove a person
from the django-developers mailing list, or revoke their access to
other technical spaces, in the event that the designated
administrators of those spaces feel a person has engaged in spamming
behavior.

Role of the Technical Board in decision-making
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Technical Board will provide oversight of the release
process. While some releases (monthly patch releases, and alpha/beta
versions of feature releases) will occur on pre-determined schedules,
feature releaes of Django will occur once the Technical Board has

> approved, by public vote, the state of the codebae for the proposed

Reviewer 18: ```suggestion
approved, by public vote, the state of the codebase for the proposed
```

series. If the final minor release of a major series is issued, and no
election has yet taken place, an election shall automatically be
triggered. The Technical Board may, at its discretion, choose to run
elections more often, but not more often than once per minor release.

In the event a member of the Technical Board is temporarily unable to
serve, the Technical Board will continue to carry out its duties
unless it would be reduced to fewer than three active members; in that
case, the Technical Board may, by majority vote, appoint a person (who
is otherwise qualified for the Technical Board) to serve until such
time as at least three elected members are able to serve again, or the
next election is held.

Members of the Technical Board cannot be removed from the technical
board once elected, unless it is determined by a unanimous vote of the
other Technical Board members and the DSF Board that they did not
possess the appropriate qualifications for the Technical Board, or
they become disqualified due to actions taken by the Code of Conduct
committee of the Django Software Foundation. In the event that a vote
is held to determine whether a person did not possess the relevant

> qualifications, that person shall bbe barred from taking pert in the

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
qualifications, that person shall be barred from taking pert in the
```

and it's unclear what the path to core membership would look like
without such issues as a route to familiarity with contributing to
Django.

There is also a serious, ongoing lack of diversity in Django core, and
no clear path to addressing it. The changes proposed here are not
sufficient to resolve this, but some type of change along these lines
is likely a necessary step toward other initiatives which could
resolve it.

The primary goal of this proposal is to remove the perceived status
associated with permission to push code to the primary Django
source-code repository, and to re-frame the ability to push code to
that repository as more of a bureaucratic role which carries with it
no special privileges or status of any sort. Recognition of
contributions to Django or the Django ecosystem should be handled by
some type of status or award to be made by the Django Software
Foundation, rather than by push permission to a repository.

Rationale
=========

Dissolving or reorganizing Django core is a recurring issue within
Django core, the broader community of Django developers, and the
DSF. In particular, there seems to be a consensus to remove the

> perceived bump in status asociated with membership in Django core,

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
perceived bump in status associated with membership in Django core,
```

Technical Board may participate in that process as needed, including
voting using the process outlined below.

The Technical Board shall also act as a tie-breaker in the event that
a discussion of the Framework team fails to achieve consensus. If any
member of the Framework team feels productive discussion of a topic
has been exhausted without achieving consensus, they may request a
decision of the Technical Board. The Technical Board may, at its
discretion, decline and encourage further discussion, or may accept
the issue and make a decision using the voting process outlined below.

Voting process of the Technical Board
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a vote of the Technical Board is required, they shall use the
following process:

1. Each member of the Technical Board shall have, from the time a
   question is put to them, one week to review the question and vote.

2. Votes shall be made in public, on the django-developers mailing
   list.

3. Each vote shall be of the form "+1" (in favor) or "-1" (not in
   favor). Each member should also provide, along with their vote,
   their rationale for voting as they did.

> 4. Once sufficient vites in either direction have been cast to form a

Reviewer 7: s/vite/vote/
